---
annotation_id: 0575af59-ba6f-4533-9eda-f7a84908b059
author: rmadams
tei_target: "#highlight-0575af59-ba6f-4533-9eda-f7a84908b059"
annotated_page: rdx_t9tdk.p.idm140132112970512
page_index: 7
target: highlight-0575af59-ba6f-4533-9eda-f7a84908b059

---
Here Cranach presents a conventional image of the Passion, representing the Crowning with Thorns (John 19: 2) within a claustrophobic, closed space, in which  Jesus is assailed by tormentors, who gesticulate wildly while his own hands are tied.  Their grotesque features indicate their evil natures, a commonplace contrast to the passive suffering of Christ in German Passion iconography.  Here, as elsewhere, such images of the tormentors often use anti-Semitic caricatures to represent Jews expressly as the enemies of Christ (James Marrow, Passion Iconography in Northern European Art of the Late Middle Ages and Early Renaissance (Kortrijk: Van Ghemmert, 1979).  On negative depictions of Jews: Joshua Trachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews: The Medieval Conception of the Jew and its Relation to Modern Anti-Semitism, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publica-tions Society, 1983); Ruth Mellinkoff, Outcasts: Signs of Otherness in Northern European Art of the Late Middle Ages (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993); Heinz Schreckenberg, The Jews in Christian Art (New York: Continuum, 1996); Mitchell Merback, ed., Beyond the Yellow Badge: New Approaches to Anti-Semitism in Medieval and Early Modern Europe (Leiden: Brill, 2007). For Luther and the Jews, Heiko Oberman, The Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Age of Renaissance and Reformation (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984).  On contemporary judicial punishments and representations of the Passion, Mitchell Merback, The Thief, the Cross and the Wheel. Pain and the Spectacle of Punishment in Medieval and Renaissance Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).([Lamb and Johnson 2013](#zotero-55DMRF7P))

---

### Works Cited

* <a name="zotero-55DMRF7P" id="zotero-55DMRF7P"></a>Lamb, Annette, and Larry Johnson. “Wicked or Wonderful: Revisiting Wikipedia.” <i>Teacher Librarian</i> 40, no. 4 (April 2013): 68–73. http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=llf&amp;AN=87083337&amp;site=ehost-live.